Test Fixtures (#14)
ImperialCollegeLondon/unit_testing_Cpp: _episodes/l3_03_test_fixture.md

Reviewer: Filename should be `l1_03_test_fixture.md`. Changing the value of `l` puts the episode in a different session in the schedule that appears in the `index`. See the structure of files in https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/intermediate_grad_school_git_course/tree/gh-pages/_episodes where the course is split in two sessions of 2h each, therefore files starting with `l1` and `l2`.

Author: @dalonsoa I am still not able to figure out the difference. On seeing the website of course you mentioned, they all appear to be same. Can you please explain further? 

Of course, I can rename the file but I would like to understand it first.

Reviewer: You’re totally right, there no difference, but that’s odd - there should be. As far as I know, the first part define the lesson day (l1, l2, etc) and the second one the episode within the lesson. That should result in a split schedule in the la ding page dor the course, but it does not.

in summary, ignore this comment as it is not that relevant.

---
title: "Introduction to Test Fixtures using GoogleTest"
teaching: TBC
exercises: TBC
questions:
- "What is a test fixture?"
- "How can I create my own test fixture using GoogleTest?"
- "What do Setup and Teardown mean in relation to test fixtures?"
objectives:
- "Understand the basics of test fixtures."
- "Write some test fixtures using GoogleTest."
- "Analyze the advantages of test fixtures."

> - "Learn why do we do we need Setup and Teardown functions."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Learn why we need Setup and Teardown functions."
```

---
title: "Introduction to Test Fixtures using GoogleTest"
teaching: TBC
exercises: TBC
questions:
- "What is a test fixture?"
- "How can I create my own test fixture using GoogleTest?"

> - "What do Setup and Teardown mean while using test fixtures?"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "What do Setup and Teardown mean in relation to test fixtures?"
```

## 2. Problem under consideration for testing

In order to create our own test fixture, we will first explain the context or problem that we are trying to solve. We will be adding tests to check that our code works as intended by making use of test fixtures.

Consider that you want to write a program to manage the details of an employee. The program should allow you to add basic details of an employee such as:

1. Name
2. Age
3. Basic Salary
4. Number of years of employment
5. Basic Bonus the employee has received in this year.

The program should calculate the Net Bonus, Tax and Salary based on the following rules:

1. Bonus Rule: An employee gets an additional £1000 bonus if she or he has worked for more than 10 years.
2. Tax Rule: Tax is calculated on a combination of basic salary and net bonus as shown below.

    * `0` if salary is less than `10k` GBP.
    * `10%` for salary between `10K-20K` GBP.
    * `20%` for salary between `20K-50K` GBP
    * `50%` for salary greater than `50K` GBP

Based on above, we can declare the employee class in `employee.h` as shown below ([Declaration of Employee class](../code/Chapter3/employee.h)).

> ```cpp
> class Employee 
> {
> private:
>     string name;
>     float age;
>     double base_salary; //salary before calculating tax and adjusting bonus.
>     double number_years_employed;
> 
>     double basic_bonus; //bonus for current year.
>     double net_bonus; //bonus after adjusting for experience.
>     
>     double tax_amount;
>     double net_salary; //salary after calculating tax and adjusting bonus.
> 
> public:
>     // Constructor.
>     Employee(const string& employee_name, float employee_age, 
>              double employeeSalary, double employeeNumberYearsEmployed,
>              double employeeBonus);
> 
>     // Public member functions to set values.
>     void setName(const std::string& employee_name); 
>     void setAge(float employee_age) ;
>     void setBaseSalary(double employeeSalary); 
>     void setNumberYearsEmployed(double employeeNumberYearsEmployed); 
>     void SetBasicBonus(double employeeBonus);
> 
>     void calcNetBonus(); //To calculate net bonus while considering experience.
>     void calcTaxAmount(); // To calculate tax to be paid based on salary with bonus
>     void calcNetSalary(); // To calculate net salary after adjusting tax and bonus.
> 
>     // Getter functions.
>     string getName() const;
>     float getAge() const;
>     double getBasicSalary() const;
>     double getNumberYearsEmployed() const;
>     double getBasicBonus() const;
>     double getNetBonus() const;
>     double getTaxAmount() const;
>     double getNetSalary() const;
> 
>     void displayInfo() const; 
> 
>     // Destructor
>     ~Employee();
> };
> ```

Reviewer: I think this block of code can be replaced by the following, keeping code and lesson in sync. See https://github.com/stevemar/code-reference-in-readme/tree/main

I'm not sure how that would be rendered by GitHub Pages, though. Maybe we can give it a try and, if it does not work, just put the code back again.

```suggestion
https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/lkr_unit_testing_forked/blob/df3743fc160148b0b6b2bd59cca4cd511b766008/code/Chapter3/employee.h#L11-L56
```

Author: I tried to accept your suggestion in 857ffa697ca3e43fdfec33db7c7d42f4e6c8eb91 but then I reverted it back in 84374c9d6921110a75a42537221ce7898e57c24f. This is because only a few lines were being shown in the box and there has to be a lot of scrolling in the box to explain the code.

- "Understand the advantages of test fixtures."
- "Understand the need of setup and teardown functions."
- "Understand how to write your own setup and teardown function."
- "Understand how to run a subset of tests."
keypoints:
- "We learnt about test fixtures in GoogleTest."
- "We learnt how to create our own test fixtures."
- "We learnt about the setup and teardown functions."
- "We learnt the advantages of test fixtures."
- "We learnt how to run a subset of tests in GoogleTest."
---
## 1. Brief Introduction of Test Fixtures
A test fixture, in the context of unit testing, refers to the preparation and configuration needed to run a set of test cases. It includes the setup of the test environment, the creation of necessary objects or resources, and the cleanup steps after the tests are executed. Test fixtures help ensure that the tests are performed in a controlled and consistent environment, providing reliable and reproducible results.

In GoogleTest, a test fixture is implemented using a test fixture class. This class serves as a container for shared setup and cleanup logic, as well as any shared objects or resources required by the test cases within the fixture.

> ### 1.1 When is a Test Fixture Needed?

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### 1.1 When is a Test Fixture Needed?
```

A test fixture is typically used in the following scenarios:

1. **Shared Setup and Teardown**: When multiple test cases require a common set of setup or teardown (which means cleaning in general and is the opposite of setup) steps, a test fixture is beneficial. Instead of duplicating the setup and teardown code in each test case, we can define it once in the test fixture and reuse it across all the tests.

2. **Reducing Code Duplication**: Test fixtures help in reducing code duplication. By encapsulating the common setup and teardown logic within a fixture, we avoid duplicating the same code in multiple test cases. This improves code maintainability and reduces the chances of errors due to inconsistent or incomplete setup/teardown.

3. **Isolation and Independence**: Test fixtures provide a level of isolation and independence for each test case. Each test case within a fixture runs in its own instance of the fixture class, ensuring that changes made by one test case do not affect the others. This allows for parallel execution of test cases without interference.

Let us understand how to create a test fixture, setup and teardown functions with examples.

> ## 2. Problem under consideration for testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## 2. Problem under consideration for testing
```

In order to create our own test fixture, we will first explain the context or problem that we are trying to solve. We will be adding tests to check that our code works as intented by making use of test fixtures.

> Consider that you want to write a program to manage the details of an employee. The program should allow you to add basic detaisl of emplyee such as 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider that you want to write a program to manage the details of an employee. The program should allow you to add basic details of employee such as:

```

1. Name
2. Age 
3. Basic Salary
4. Number of years of employment
5. Basic Bonus the employee has received in this year.

The program should calculate the Net Bonus, Tax and Salary based on the following rules.

> 1. Bonus Rule: An employee gets an additional 1000£ bonus if she or he has worked for more than 10 years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

1. Bonus Rule: An employee gets an additional 1000£ bonus if she or he has worked for more than 10 years.
```

2. Tax Rule: Tax is calculated on a combination of basic salary and net bonus as shown below.
    
    * `0` if salary is less than `10k` GBP.

>     * `10%` for slar between `10K-20K` GBP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `10%` for salary between `10K-20K` GBP.
```

    * `20%` for salary between `20K-50K` GBP

>     * `50%` for slary greater than `50K` GBP 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * `50%` for salary greater than `50K` GBP 
```

> Please be advised that the purpose of above rules is to create functions which can have multiple branches and hence needs additional testing. We have tried our best to keep the example simple and realistic.

Reviewer: I don't feel this clarification is necessary. It should be understood that any examples in the course are just that, examples to prove a concept and technique. I would remove the paragraph. 
```suggestion
```

    double net_salary; //salary after calculating tax and adjusting bonus.

public:
    // Constructor.
    Employee(const string& employee_name, float employee_age, 
             double employeeSalary, double employeeNumberYearsEmployed,
             double employeeBonus);

    // Public member functions to set values.
    void setName(const std::string& employee_name); 
    void setAge(float employee_age) ;
    void setBaseSalary(double employeeSalary); 
    void setNumberYearsEmployed(double employeeNumberYearsEmployed); 
    void SetBasicBonus(double employeeBonus);

    void calcNetBonus(); //To calculate net bonus while considering experience.
    void calcTaxAmount(); // To calculate tax to be paid based on salary with bonus
    void calcNetSalary(); // To calculate net salary after adjusting tax and bonus.

    // Getter functions.
    string getName() const;
    float getAge() const;
    double getBasicSalary() const;
    double getNumberYearsEmployed() const;
    double getBasicBonus() const;
    double getNetBonus() const;
    double getTaxAmount() const;
    double getNetSalary() const;

    void displayInfo() const; 

    // Destructor
    ~Employee();
};
```

> For the deifinition part, we include only a few functions here. You can find the complete definion of this class in [employee.cpp](../code/Chapter3/employee.cpp).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the definition part, we include only a few functions here. You can find the complete definition of this class in [employee.cpp](../code/Chapter3/employee.cpp).
```

    {
        throw invalid_argument("Name cannot be empty");
    }
    name = employee_name;
}

// Employee gets additional £1000 bonus if they have been employed for more than 10 years.
void Employee::calcNetBonus() 
{   
    if(number_years_employed > years_exp_for_extra_bonus)
    {
        net_bonus = basic_bonus + extra_bonus;
    }
    else
    {
        net_bonus = basic_bonus;
    }
}

// Function to calculate tex amount.
void Employee::calcTaxAmount() 
{
    double salary_with_bonus = base_salary + net_bonus;
    if(salary_with_bonus <= 10000)
    {
        tax_amount = 0.0;
    }
    else if(salary_with_bonus > 10000 && salary_with_bonus <= 20000)
    {
        tax_amount = 0.1*(salary_with_bonus-10000);
    }
    else if(salary_with_bonus > 20000 && salary_with_bonus <= 50000)
    {
        tax_amount = 0.1*10000 + 0.2*(salary_with_bonus-20000);
    }
    else if(salary_with_bonus > 50000)
    {
        tax_amount = 0.1*10000 + \
                     0.2*30000 + \
                     0.5*(salary_with_bonus-50000);
    }
}

// Fucntion to calculate the ney salary.
void Employee::calcNetSalary() 
{
    net_salary = base_salary + net_bonus - tax_amount;
}

> ```

Reviewer: I don't think that adding all this code in the middle of this lesson adds much given that it is not being used inn this episode - it is used in the next one. I would remove it from here and leave just the declaration above which is largely self explanatory. If implementation details are not necessary at this point.

Author: Resolved in 8d4ec5ce637e86c5d3f9ded79606867d056496a5 and df3743fc160148b0b6b2bd59cca4cd511b766008

> ```
> With this code, we now have the necessary fragments to test our `employee` class. Let us see this in action.
> ## 3. Unit tests for our employee class without test fixture
> In order to cleary demonstrate why a test fixture would be needed, we first write some tests for our employee class without using a fixture. This will help us to understand why does a fixture is useful and how to use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

With this code, we now have the necessary fragments to test our `employee` class. Let us see this in action.

## 3. Unit tests for our employee class without test fixture

In order to cleary demonstrate why a test fixture would be needed, we first write some tests for our employee class without using a fixture. This will help us to understand why does a fixture is useful and how to use it.
```

Author: Resolved in 9cbd2c3163d52868a904623fb14c4bdebc0879cb

For this subsection, let us assume that we are checking two functionalities of our employee class (for code, please see [1_employeetest.cpp](../code/Chapter3/1_employeetest.cpp)) which are:-

1. We can set the name of employee correctly.
2. We can set the age correctly.

The code for these two tests (which is entirely based on what we learn in second module of this course) is given below.

```cpp
// Test if we can set the name of an employee.
TEST(EmployeeTest, CanSetName) {
    Employee employee{"John", 25, 10000, 5, 1000};
    employee.setName("John Doe");
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getName(), "John Doe");
}

// Test if we can set the age of an employee.
TEST(EmployeeTest, CanSetAge) {
    Employee employee{"John", 25, 10000, 5, 1000};
    employee.setAge(30);
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getAge(), 30);
}
``` 

> While the above test solve our problem, there is a problem of code duplication and object creation for each test. As we can see in each test that we have to create an instance of employee class by using the statement `Employee employee{"John", 25, 10000, 5, 1000};`. This is against the `DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself)' https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

While the above test solve our problem, there is a problem of code duplication and object creation for each test. As we can see in each test that we have to create an instance of employee class by using the statement `Employee employee{"John", 25, 10000, 5, 1000};`. This is against the `DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself)' https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself. 
```

Morover, all our tests depend on the same `employee` class. Therefore, it makes sense to create an instance of `employee` at one place and let the GoogleTest manage the creation of the instance for each test case. Let us see this in action in next section.

> ## 4. Test fixture for our employee class

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## 4. Test fixture for our employee class
```

Now that we know why do we need a test fixture, let us fist learn about the basic syntax of the test fixture in GoogleTest and then write the code for it.

In GooglTest, a test fixture is created by writing another class which is derived from `::testing::Test` using `public` [access specifier](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/access). The genreal syntax is as shown below

```cpp

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

}
```
Since we now have all the basic tools to create our own test fixtures, let us rewrite the above tests by using a fixture. The code is present in this [2_employeetest.cpp](../code/Chapter3/2_employeetest.cpp). For reference, the tests are shown in the cell below.

```cpp
// Create a test fixture.
class EmployeeTestFixture : public::testing::Test {
    public:
        Employee employee{"John", 25, 45000, 12, 5000};

};

// Test if we can set the name of an employee.
TEST_F(EmployeeTestFixture, CanSetName) {
    employee.setName("John Doe");
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getName(), "John Doe");
}

// Test that the name cannot be empty.
TEST_F(EmployeeTestFixture, NameCannotBeEmpty) {
    EXPECT_THROW(employee.setName(""), invalid_argument);
}

// Test if we can set the age of an employee.
TEST_F(EmployeeTestFixture, CanSetAge) {
    employee.setAge(30);
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getAge(), 30);
}

//Test that the tax calculation is correct.
TEST_F(EmployeeTestFixture, TaxCalculationIsCorrect) {
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getTaxAmount(), 7500);
}

// Check that the net salary is correct.
TEST_F(EmployeeTestFixture, NetSalaryIsCorrect) {
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getNetSalary(), 43500);
}

> ```
> ## 5. Why do we need setup and teardown in test fixture?
> So far, our test fixture class only creates an instance of object for the class under test. In many cases, we often want some common action for all our tests such as adding an entry, connection to a database, response from a site etc. Let us try to understand this with example which will set the background for the `setup` and `teardown` functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## 5. Why do we need setup and teardown in test fixture?

So far, our test fixture class only creates an instance of object for the class under test. In many cases, we often want some common action for all our tests such as adding an entry, connection to a database, response from a site etc. Let us try to understand this with example which will set the background for the `setup` and `teardown` functions.
```

Author: Resolved in 9cbd2c3163d52868a904623fb14c4bdebc0879cb

```cpp
void EmployeeTable::addEmployee(const Employee& employee) {
    employees.push_back(employee);
}

void EmployeeTable::removeEmployee(const std::string& employeeName) {
    for (auto it = employees.begin(); it != employees.end(); ++it) {
        if (it->getName() == employeeName) {
            employees.erase(it);
            break;
        }
    }
}

void EmployeeTable::displayEmployeesName() const {
    cout << "-------------------------------------------------- " << endl;
    for (const auto& employee : employees) {
        std::cout << employee.getName() << std::endl;
    }
    cout << "-------------------------------------------------- " << endl;
}

bool EmployeeTable::isEmpty() const {
    return employees.empty();
}

int EmployeeTable::getEntryCount() const {
    return employees.size();
}

> ```

Reviewer: I don't think it is necessary to add here the full definition of the different methods. Just their declaration should be enough to understand the tests shown below and will make the lesson less cluttered with code.

Author: Resolved in df3743fc160148b0b6b2bd59cca4cd511b766008 as it was suggested by James also.

> We want to test our table class. In particular, we are interested in testing the following:-
> 1. Table is not empty after adding an employee.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to test our table class. In particular, we are interested in testing the following:

1. Table is not empty after adding an employee.
```

TEST_F(EmployeeTableTest, TableIsNotEmptyAfterAddingEmployee) {
    Employee new_employee("John Doe", 30, 5000, 5, 1000);
    table.addEmployee(new_employee);
    EXPECT_FALSE(table.isEmpty());
}

// Test that number of entries is one after adding an employee.
TEST_F(EmployeeTableTest, NumberOfEntriesIsOneAfterAddingEmployee) {
    Employee new_employee("John Doe", 30, 5000, 5, 1000);
    table.addEmployee(new_employee);
    EXPECT_EQ(table.getEntryCount(), 1);
}

// Test that number of enries in table reduces by one after removing an employee.
TEST_F(EmployeeTableTest, NumberOfEntriesIsOneLessAfterRemovingEmployee) {
    Employee new_employee("John Doe", 30, 5000, 5, 1000);
    table.addEmployee(new_employee);
    table.removeEmployee("John Doe");
    EXPECT_EQ(table.getEntryCount(), 0);
}
```

As we can see from above, that all creating an instance of `employee` first by using the statement like `Employee new_employee` followed by adding an entry to the table `table.addEmployee(new_employee)`. Thus, we can see that our tests need some setup which is common for all and hence `Setup` functionc comes to rescue for exactly such scenarios.

> ## 6. Setup and Teardown function in test fixture
> A `Setup()` function in a test fixture is responsible for providing and executing the necessary setup instructions for our tests. While a `Teardown()` function is responsible for cleaning up operations such as deleting the memory allocated, closing the database connection etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 6. Setup and Teardown function in test fixture

A `Setup()` function in a test fixture is responsible for providing and executing the necessary setup instructions for our tests. While a `Teardown()` function is responsible for cleaning up operations such as deleting the memory allocated, closing the database connection etc.
```

To create a `Setup()` function, we just define this function in our fixture class which will [override](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/override) the [virtual function](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/virtual) in `testing::Test` class in GoogleTest.

For our table class, we can create the `Setup()` and `Teardown()` functions as shown below. For more details, please see [4_table_test_with_setup.cpp](../code/Chapter3/4_table_test_with_setup.cpp).

```cpp
// Test fixture for EmployeeTable class.
class EmployeeTableTest : public testing::Test {
    public:
        EmployeeTable table;
};

TEST_F(EmployeeTableTest, TableIsEmptyWhenCreated) {
    EXPECT_TRUE(table.isEmpty());
}

TEST_F(EmployeeTableTest, TableHasSizeZeroWhenCreated) {
    EXPECT_EQ(table.getEntryCount(), 0);
}

class EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee : public testing::Test {
    public:
        EmployeeTable table;
        Employee* employee;

        void SetUp() override {
            employee = new Employee("John Doe", 30, 5000, 5, 1000);
            table.addEmployee(*employee);
        }

        void TearDown() override {
            delete employee;
            employee = nullptr;
        }
};

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

TEST_F(EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee, TableIsNotEmptyWhenCreatedWithOneEmployee) {
    EXPECT_FALSE(table.isEmpty());
}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

TEST_F(EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee, NumberOfEntriesIsOneWhenCreatedWithOneEmployee) {
    EXPECT_EQ(table.getEntryCount(), 1);
}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

TEST_F(EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee, NumberOfEntriesIsOneLessAfterRemovingEmployee) {
    table.removeEmployee("John Doe");
    EXPECT_EQ(table.getEntryCount(), 0);
}
```

As we can see from above, our test looks much cleaner with the setup and teardown function. The reason for creating another test fixture for writing `Setup()` and `Teardown()` is because the first two tests do not require it.

> ## 7. Tests Filtering in GoogleTest
> Sometimes, we may have some tests that take a lot of time to run. In some other case, when we are developing and testing our code, we do not want to run our entire test suite and run only one of the test that we have recently added. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 7. Tests Filtering in GoogleTest

Sometimes, we may have some tests that take a lot of time to run. In some other case, when we are developing and testing our code, we do not want to run our entire test suite and run only one of the test that we have recently added. 
```

---
title: "Introduction to Test Fixtures using GoogleTest"
teaching: TBC
exercises: TBC
questions:
- "What is a test fixture?"

> - "How to create your own test fixture using GoogleTest?"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "How can I create my own test fixture using GoogleTest?"
```

> - "What does Setup and Teardown mean while using test fixtures?"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "What do Setup and Teardown mean while using test fixtures?"
```

---
title: "Introduction to Test Fixtures using GoogleTest"
teaching: TBC
exercises: TBC
questions:
- "What is a test fixture?"
- "How to create your own test fixture using GoogleTest?"
- "What does Setup and Teardown mean while using test fixtures?"
objectives:

> - "Understand the basics of test fixture."
> - "Understand how to create test fixture using GoogleTest."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "Understand the basics of test fixtures."
- "Understand how to create test fixtures using GoogleTest."
```

- "Understand the advantages of test fixtures."
- "Understand the need of setup and teardown functions."

> - "Understand how to write your own setup and teardown function."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "Understand how to write your own setup and teardown functions."
```

- "Understand how to run a subset of tests."

> keypoints:

Reviewer 2: This should be fleshed out

Author: If I understood clearly, you want more details to be added here (checked the meaning of phrase *flesh out* on Google). I do not think that we need to add more details here. This is the objective section and brief one liner should be OK. The explanation should be there in the text.

Reviewer 2: I was referring to the "keypoints" section. I think this should provide a list of the main take-aways from the episode, rather than just re-stating the objectives.

Reviewer: For the objectives, strinctly speaking, we should be using [Bloom's taxonomy](https://lib.guides.umd.edu/c.php?g=598357&p=4142337) in all these sections - in all of our courses. I think that the purpose of this course is largely to teach people to "apply", and not just "understand" which will fall a bit short of the expectations. @lkr-ind , maybe you can review some of the objectives using verbs from the "apply" section. 

About the keypoints, I agree with @dc2917 that they should be more take away messages, eg. "Setup and tear down functions let you configure the tests so they are reproducible and independent form each other", or something along those lines.

Author: @dc2917 @dalonsoa Thanks @dalonsoa for Bloom's taxonomy. I have made changes to keypoints and the objective section in faad5d5089b25497b670cab7cf40aa4c933645b5

- "We learnt about test fixtures in GoogleTest."
- "We learnt how to create our own test fixtures."
- "We learnt about the setup and teardown functions."
- "We learnt the advantages of test fixtures."
- "We learnt how to run a subset of tests in GoogleTest."
---
## 1. Brief Introduction of Test Fixtures

A test fixture, in the context of unit testing, refers to the preparation and configuration needed to run a set of test cases. It includes the setup of the test environment, the creation of necessary objects or resources, and the cleanup steps after the tests are executed. Test fixtures help ensure that the tests are performed in a controlled and consistent environment, providing reliable and reproducible results.

In GoogleTest, a test fixture is implemented using a test fixture class. This class serves as a container for shared setup and cleanup logic, as well as any shared objects or resources required by the test cases within the fixture.

### 1.1 When is a Test Fixture Needed?

A test fixture is typically used in the following scenarios:

> 1. **Shared Setup and Teardown**: When multiple test cases require a common set of setup or teardown (which means cleaning in general and is the opposite of setup) steps, a test fixture is beneficial. Instead of duplicating the setup and teardown code in each test case, we can define it once in the test fixture and reuse it across all the tests.

Reviewer 2: I think this point might be confusing since setup and teardown have not been formally introduced yet

Author: This was suggested to be rephrased by one of the reviewers and the suggestion was accepted. I feel that it is an important point which emphasize the need of test fixtures. Please see commit 09080a880c79ceb18394459e56d2075784745ec3

> 1. **Shared Setup and Teardown**: When multiple test cases require a common set of setup or teardown (which means cleaning in general and is the opposite of setup) steps, a test fixture is beneficial. Instead of duplicating the setup and teardown code in each test case, we can define it once in the test fixture and reuse it across all the tests.

Reviewer 3: Setup and teardown: I would paraphrase to something more generic and relatable:
```suggestion
1. **Shared Setup and Teardown**: When multiple test cases require identical preparation and cleanup, a test fixture is beneficial. Instead of duplicating the setup and teardown code in each test case, we can define it once in the test fixture and reuse it across all the tests.
```

2. **Reducing Code Duplication**: Test fixtures help in reducing code duplication. By encapsulating the common setup and teardown logic within a fixture, we avoid duplicating the same code in multiple test cases. This improves code maintainability and reduces the chances of errors due to inconsistent or incomplete setup/teardown.

3. **Isolation and Independence**: Test fixtures provide a level of isolation and independence for each test case. Each test case within a fixture runs in its own instance of the fixture class, ensuring that changes made by one test case do not affect the others. This allows for parallel execution of test cases without interference.

Let us understand how to create a test fixture, setup and teardown functions with examples.

## 2. Problem under consideration for testing

In order to create our own test fixture, we will first explain the context or problem that we are trying to solve. We will be adding tests to check that our code works as intended by making use of test fixtures.

> Consider that you want to write a program to manage the details of an employee. The program should allow you to add basic details of employee such as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider that you want to write a program to manage the details of an employee. The program should allow you to add basic details of an employee such as:
```

1. Name
2. Age
3. Basic Salary
4. Number of years of employment
5. Basic Bonus the employee has received in this year.

> The program should calculate the Net Bonus, Tax and Salary based on the following rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The program should calculate the Net Bonus, Tax and Salary based on the following rules:
```

> 1. Bonus Rule: An employee gets an additional 1000£ bonus if she or he has worked for more than 10 years.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Bonus Rule: An employee gets an additional £1000 bonus if she or he has worked for more than 10 years.
```

2. Tax Rule: Tax is calculated on a combination of basic salary and net bonus as shown below.

>     * `0` if salary is less than `10k` GBP.
>     * `10%` for salary between `10K-20K` GBP.
>     * `20%` for salary between `20K-50K` GBP
>     * `50%` for salary greater than `50K` GBP

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should use the actual values?

```suggestion
    * `0` if salary is less than £12,570
    * `20%` for salary between `£12,571 and £50,270
    * `40%` for salary between £50,271 and £125,140
    * `45%` for salary greater than £125,140
```

Author: No, I don't even worry about that. The actual values have no relation to the course. Moreover, it will force me to do some more calculations by hand for the tests. I will keep this as they are.

Reviewer: I agree with @lkr-ind . This is just a toy example to show a point so I feel it's better to keep things simple.

    {
        throw invalid_argument("Name cannot be empty");
    }
    name = employee_name;
}

// Employee gets additional £1000 bonus if they have been employed for more than 10 years.
void Employee::calcNetBonus() 
{   
    if(number_years_employed > years_exp_for_extra_bonus)
    {
        net_bonus = basic_bonus + extra_bonus;
    }
    else
    {
        net_bonus = basic_bonus;
    }
}

// Function to calculate tex amount.
void Employee::calcTaxAmount() 
{
    double salary_with_bonus = base_salary + net_bonus;
    if(salary_with_bonus <= 10000)
    {
        tax_amount = 0.0;
    }
    else if(salary_with_bonus > 10000 && salary_with_bonus <= 20000)
    {
        tax_amount = 0.1*(salary_with_bonus-10000);
    }
    else if(salary_with_bonus > 20000 && salary_with_bonus <= 50000)
    {
        tax_amount = 0.1*10000 + 0.2*(salary_with_bonus-20000);
    }
    else if(salary_with_bonus > 50000)
    {
        tax_amount = 0.1*10000 + \
                     0.2*30000 + \
                     0.5*(salary_with_bonus-50000);
    }
}

// Function to calculate the ney salary.
void Employee::calcNetSalary() 
{
    net_salary = base_salary + net_bonus - tax_amount;
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: A lot of code to shove in someone's face in a seminar. Maybe just briefly look over it live, include the really relevant parts in the text, and leave going over the actual code for the exercises?

You could even just include the function signatures and explain what the function does in plain English.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. It has been resolved in 8d4ec5ce637e86c5d3f9ded79606867d056496a5

With this code, we now have the necessary fragments to test our `Employee` class. Let us see this in action.

> ## 3. Unit tests for our employee class without test fixture

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 3. Unit tests for our employee class without test fixtures
```

In order to clearly demonstrate why a test fixture would be needed, we first write some tests for our employee class without using a fixture. This will help us to understand why does a fixture is useful and how to use it.

For this subsection, let us assume that we are checking two functionalities of our employee class (for code, please see [1_employeetest.cpp](../code/Chapter3/1_employeetest.cpp)) which are:-

1. We can set the name of employee correctly.
2. We can set the age correctly.

The code for these two tests (which is entirely based on what we learn in second module of this course) is given below.

```cpp
// Test if we can set the name of an employee.
TEST(EmployeeTest, CanSetName) {
    Employee employee{"John", 25, 10000, 5, 1000};
    employee.setName("John Doe");
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getName(), "John Doe");
}

// Test if we can set the age of an employee.
TEST(EmployeeTest, CanSetAge) {
    Employee employee{"John", 25, 10000, 5, 1000};
    employee.setAge(30);
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getAge(), 30);
}
```

> While the above test solve our problem, there is a problem of code duplication and object creation for each test. As we can see in each test that we have to create an instance of employee class by using the statement `Employee employee{"John", 25, 10000, 5, 1000};`. This is against the `DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself)' https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the above test solve our problem, there is a problem of code duplication and object creation for each test. As we can see in each test that we have to create an instance of employee class by using the statement `Employee employee{"John", 25, 10000, 5, 1000};`. This is against the `DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself)' https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself principle.
```

> While the above test solve our problem, there is a problem of code duplication and object creation for each test. As we can see in each test that we have to create an instance of employee class by using the statement `Employee employee{"John", 25, 10000, 5, 1000};`. This is against the `DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself)' https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself.

Reviewer 3: I would try to drive the motivation behind this even further by noting that the setup (and teardown?) function itself could potentially be quite complex -- e.g. loading custom configuration files or connecting to a test SQL server. I probably wouldn't be so convinced by the argument if all I had to do is construct a simple object each time.

Author: @jamesturner246 Although I understood your point, I am not sure that I can integrate it well here. The text you have highlighted here was a transition from a normal test (without fixtures) to use of fixtures. We have not yet discussed anything about the Setup and Teardown yet. That is why, I kept the explanation like that. If you want, you can create an issue for this and add what you would like to add here later.

> Moreover, all our tests depend on the same `employee` class. Therefore, it makes sense to create an instance of `employee` at one place and let the GoogleTest manage the creation of the instance for each test case. Let us see this in action in next section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, all our tests depend on the same `Employee` class. It therefore makes sense to create an instance of `Employee` once, and let the GoogleTest manage the creation of the instance for each test case. Let us see this in action in next section.
```

## 4. Test fixture for our employee class

Now that we know why do we need a test fixture, let us fist learn about the basic syntax of the test fixture in GoogleTest and then write the code for it.

> In GooglTest, a test fixture is created by writing another class which is derived from `::testing::Test` using `public` [access specifier](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/access). The general syntax is as shown below

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In GoogleTest, a test fixture is created by writing another class which is derived from `::testing::Test` using `public` [access specifier](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/access). The general syntax is as shown below
```

```cpp
class Your_test_fixture_class_name : public::testing::Test {
    public:
        ClassUnderTest publicInstance;

    protected:
        ClassUnderTest protectedInstance;

    private:
        ClassUnderTest privateInstance;
};
```

> Please note that you do not need to use all three access specifiers `public`, `private` and `protected`  defined above. The choice would depend on the following:-

Reviewer 3: Do we really need to explain `public`, `protected` and `private` here? One might hope the reader knows about access specifiers. I'm not sure the explanations of the latter two are important for the task. Maybe briefly mention it if it's critical.

Author: These access specifiers have been defined in the context of test fixtures (although the meaning remains same). When I started learning, many of the texts or online resources were using `public` for declaring the class under test. I was under the impression that this is the only choice that is available (Sorry, my lack of understanding).

Then I felt like that some students may also feel the same. This is why I introduced all 3 here and specifically  mentioned  that all are OK and allowed and why to choose one over another.

I do not think it will take too much of time during the course and I think it is useful.

If you still want me to delete this section, I am happy to do that.

Reviewer 2: I'd expect participants of this course to understand access specifiers, but I agree that these are defined in the context of test fixtures, so should be good to keep.

Reviewer: I'm with Dan. While specifiers are probably well known, here they are explained in the context of fixtures, which add a small twist to them.

2. **protected**: This access specifier restricts the visibility of the test fixture class and its members to derived classes and other classes within the same hierarchy. It can be useful if we have derived test fixture classes that need access to the class under test or if we want to limit the accessibility of the test fixture within a certain scope.

3. **private**: This access specifier restricts the visibility of the test fixture class and its members only to the test fixture class itself. It can be useful if we want to encapsulate the test logic within the test fixture class and prevent external access or if we want to limit the scope of the test fixture.

For our course, we will be using the `public` access specifier. Once we have the test fixture class, we use the `TEST_F` macro available in GoogleTest to write our tests instead of the `TEST` macro we have been using so far. The general syntax is given below.

```cpp
TEST_F(Your_test_fixture_class_name, Your_test_name) {
    // Test logic goes here
}
```

> Since we now have all the basic tools to create our own test fixtures, let us rewrite the above tests by using a fixture. The code is present in this [2_employeetest.cpp](../code/Chapter3/2_employeetest.cpp). For reference, the tests are shown in the cell below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since we now have all the basic tools to create our own test fixtures, let us rewrite the above tests using a fixture. The code is present in this [2_employeetest.cpp](../code/Chapter3/2_employeetest.cpp). For reference, the tests are shown in the cell below.
```

```cpp
// Create a test fixture.
class EmployeeTestFixture : public::testing::Test {
    public:
        Employee employee{"John", 25, 45000, 12, 5000};

};

// Test if we can set the name of an employee.
TEST_F(EmployeeTestFixture, CanSetName) {
    employee.setName("John Doe");
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getName(), "John Doe");
}

// Test that the name cannot be empty.
TEST_F(EmployeeTestFixture, NameCannotBeEmpty) {
    EXPECT_THROW(employee.setName(""), invalid_argument);
}

// Test if we can set the age of an employee.
TEST_F(EmployeeTestFixture, CanSetAge) {
    employee.setAge(30);
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getAge(), 30);
}

//Test that the tax calculation is correct.
TEST_F(EmployeeTestFixture, TaxCalculationIsCorrect) {
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getTaxAmount(), 7500);
}

// Check that the net salary is correct.
TEST_F(EmployeeTestFixture, NetSalaryIsCorrect) {
    EXPECT_EQ(employee.getNetSalary(), 43500);
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: Maybe just have the `CanSetName` and `CanSetAge` examples, like for the non-fixture example above. Demonstrates the point clearly and concisely.

Author: Implemented this suggestion and removed these two functions in 8d4ec5ce637e86c5d3f9ded79606867d056496a5

## 5. Why do we need setup and teardown in test fixture?

So far, our test fixture class only creates an instance of object for the class under test. In many cases, we often want some common action for all our tests such as adding an entry, connection to a database, response from a site etc. Let us try to understand this with example which will set the background for the `setup` and `teardown` functions.

> Let us consider that we are creating a table which will store the details of various employees. The table allows us to add new entries, remove employee from the table, get the number of entries in the table etc. The declaration of table class is given in [employee_table.h](../code/Chapter3/employee_table.h). The definitions of table class is present in [employee_table.cpp](../code/Chapter3/employee_table.cpp). We give the definition of table class below for reference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let us consider that we are creating a table which will store the details of various employees. The table allows us to add new entries, remove employees from the table, get the number of entries in the table etc. The declaration of table class is given in [employee_table.h](../code/Chapter3/employee_table.h). The definitions of table class is present in [employee_table.cpp](../code/Chapter3/employee_table.cpp). We give the definition of table class below for reference.
```

```cpp
void EmployeeTable::addEmployee(const Employee& employee) {
    employees.push_back(employee);
}

void EmployeeTable::removeEmployee(const std::string& employeeName) {
    for (auto it = employees.begin(); it != employees.end(); ++it) {
        if (it->getName() == employeeName) {
            employees.erase(it);
            break;
        }
    }
}

void EmployeeTable::displayEmployeesName() const {
    cout << "-------------------------------------------------- " << endl;
    for (const auto& employee : employees) {
        std::cout << employee.getName() << std::endl;
    }

>     cout << "-------------------------------------------------- " << endl;

Reviewer 3: Same again here. I would just list the function signatures with a one-liner comment explaining what they do, and point the user to the full code.

Author: Resolved in df3743fc160148b0b6b2bd59cca4cd511b766008.

```cpp
// Test fixture for EmployeeTable class.
class EmployeeTableTest : public testing::Test {
    public:
        EmployeeTable table;
};

// Test that the table is not empty after adding an employee.
TEST_F(EmployeeTableTest, TableIsNotEmptyAfterAddingEmployee) {
    Employee new_employee("John Doe", 30, 5000, 5, 1000);
    table.addEmployee(new_employee);
    EXPECT_FALSE(table.isEmpty());
}

// Test that number of entries is one after adding an employee.
TEST_F(EmployeeTableTest, NumberOfEntriesIsOneAfterAddingEmployee) {
    Employee new_employee("John Doe", 30, 5000, 5, 1000);
    table.addEmployee(new_employee);
    EXPECT_EQ(table.getEntryCount(), 1);
}

// Test that number of entries in table reduces by one after removing an employee.
TEST_F(EmployeeTableTest, NumberOfEntriesIsOneLessAfterRemovingEmployee) {
    Employee new_employee("John Doe", 30, 5000, 5, 1000);
    table.addEmployee(new_employee);
    table.removeEmployee("John Doe");
    EXPECT_EQ(table.getEntryCount(), 0);
}
```

> As we can see from above, that all creating an instance of `employee` first by using the statement like `Employee new_employee` followed by adding an entry to the table `table.addEmployee(new_employee)`. Thus, we can see that our tests need some setup which is common for all and hence `Setup` function comes to rescue for exactly such scenarios.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this sentence

Author: Thanks for pointing that out. I missed a few words while writing. I have now corrected it in 94197d78b633256f1a08b783972255fcd130d9a1.

## 6. Setup and Teardown function in test fixture

> A `Setup()` function in a test fixture is responsible for providing and executing the necessary setup instructions for our tests. While a `Teardown()` function is responsible for cleaning up operations such as deleting the memory allocated, closing the database connection etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A `Setup()` function in a test fixture is responsible for providing and executing the necessary setup instructions for our tests. Similarly, a `Teardown()` function is responsible for cleaning up operations such as deleting the memory allocated, closing the database connection etc.
```

        void SetUp() override {
            employee = new Employee("John Doe", 30, 5000, 5, 1000);
            table.addEmployee(*employee);
        }

        void TearDown() override {
            delete employee;
            employee = nullptr;
        }
};

TEST_F(EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee, TableIsNotEmptyWhenCreatedWithOneEmployee) {
    EXPECT_FALSE(table.isEmpty());
}

TEST_F(EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee, NumberOfEntriesIsOneWhenCreatedWithOneEmployee) {
    EXPECT_EQ(table.getEntryCount(), 1);
}

TEST_F(EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee, NumberOfEntriesIsOneLessAfterRemovingEmployee) {
    table.removeEmployee("John Doe");
    EXPECT_EQ(table.getEntryCount(), 0);
}
```

As we can see from above, our test looks much cleaner with the setup and teardown function. The reason for creating another test fixture for writing `Setup()` and `Teardown()` is because the first two tests do not require it.

## 7. Tests Filtering in GoogleTest

Sometimes, we may have some tests that take a lot of time to run. In some other case, when we are developing and testing our code, we do not want to run our entire test suite and run only one of the test that we have recently added.

> GoogleTest allows to filter test by command line parameter `--gtest_filter`. The general syntax to use `gtest_filter` is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GoogleTest allows us to select or omit tests using the command line option `--gtest_filter`. The general syntax to use `gtest_filter` is
```

```bash
$ ./your_executable --gtest_filter=Pattern[-Pattern]
```

where `Pattern` can be a valid string patterns. The `-Pattern` will run all tests except the pattern in the command. Instead of a pattern, we can also use full test name in the form `test_suite_name.test_name`.

> Let us run our table tests in the file [4_table_test_with_setup.cpp](../code/Chapter3/4_table_test_with_setup.cpp). Let us assume that the executable name is `my_test`. We get the following output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let us run our table tests in the file [4_table_test_with_setup.cpp](../code/Chapter3/4_table_test_with_setup.cpp). Let us assume that the executable name is `employee_table_tests`. We get the following output.
```

If we're going to teach best practise we should use best practise

> Let us run our table tests in the file [4_table_test_with_setup.cpp](../code/Chapter3/4_table_test_with_setup.cpp). Let us assume that the executable name is `my_test`. We get the following output.

Reviewer 3: This section is useful, but I wonder if it should be separated into its own section, or maybe put into another section where you introduce running gTest binaries?

Author: It is a small subsection and I would like to keep it here for now.

[----------] Global test environment set-up.
[----------] 2 tests from EmployeeTableTest
[ RUN      ] EmployeeTableTest.TableIsEmptyWhenCreated
[       OK ] EmployeeTableTest.TableIsEmptyWhenCreated (0 ms)
[ RUN      ] EmployeeTableTest.TableHasSizeZeroWhenCreated
[       OK ] EmployeeTableTest.TableHasSizeZeroWhenCreated (0 ms)
[----------] 2 tests from EmployeeTableTest (0 ms total)

[----------] 3 tests from EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee
[ RUN      ] EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee.TableIsNotEmptyWhenCreatedWithOneEmployee
[       OK ] EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee.TableIsNotEmptyWhenCreatedWithOneEmployee (0 ms)
[ RUN      ] EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee.NumberOfEntriesIsOneWhenCreatedWithOneEmployee
[       OK ] EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee.NumberOfEntriesIsOneWhenCreatedWithOneEmployee (0 ms)
[ RUN      ] EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee.NumberOfEntriesIsOneLessAfterRemovingEmployee
[       OK ] EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee.NumberOfEntriesIsOneLessAfterRemovingEmployee (0 ms)
[----------] 3 tests from EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee (0 ms total)

[----------] Global test environment tear-down
[==========] 5 tests from 2 test suites ran. (0 ms total)
[  PASSED  ] 5 tests.
```

> Since, we defined 5 test, all tests run if we run the executable. Now, let us filter the tests. We want to run only the tests associated with `EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee`. We use the following command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since, we defined 5 tests, all tests run if we run the executable. Now, let us filter the tests. We want to run only the tests associated with `EmployeeTableWithOneEmployee`. We use the following command
```
